---
meta:
    author: Emma Krebs
    topic: Symplectic Integrations
    course: TN Tech PHYS4130
    term: Spring 2026
---

# Symplectic Integrations

## Types of Integrations

- Introduce topic. Explain different times of intergrations and how that effects the error, precision, and most importantly how to conserve energy in problems.
- Explain why conserving energy is very important, give examples of programs that its important in (orbits, etc)
- Introduce your program, working with simple harmonic motion, the equations and derivatives from your main source.
- Explain how simple harmonic motion is a useful system to understand because of applications.

### Symplectic Integration
- Explain what symplectic integration is and the function you used, what it does good at.
- Include image showing the process the function goes through with midpoints. Include equation of calculation it does.
- Show image it produces, the one generated by your program from different w terms and dampening.
- Explain why this makes sense.
- Talk about linear dampending (spiral!)

### RK45
- Explain what the RK45 function is, what it does good at, and how it compares to the work we previously did with RK2.
- Include image showing the process the function goes through with midpoints. Include equation of calculation it does.
- Explain the snippet of code for Rk45 and how you set it up, what it does with its arguments, etc.
- Talk about linear dampending 

### Odeint
- Explain what the Odent function is and what it does better than the other 
- Include image showing the process the function goes through with midpoints. Include equation of calculation it does.
- Explain the snippet of code for Odeint and how you set it up, what it does with its arguments, etc.
- Talk about linear dampending 

### Final Comparison
- Create a graph with all three functions and compare the differences between them. Summarizing basically.
- Here you will also talk about the T+V energy conservation (but more on that after I do the extensions).

## Extensions (More to be added once done. Planning to do at least 2 of them)

### Symplectics Deep Dive: Programming
- This one I will do because this is where I want to talk more about the energy conservation in this system.
- This problem will probably be the hardest to complete. 

### Symplectics Deep Dive: Calculation
- Derivation problem. Will do similar setup to the extension I did on the previous project.

### Virial Theorem
- The one I probabaly want to do the most
- Planning to do gravity (If I have time I will do second system)

## Languages, Libraries, Lessons Learned

- Scipy library is a big one
- Energy conservation in programs
- More about 

## Timekeeping

3/12: 2 and 1/2 hours. 

## Sources

Main Source: https://math.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Differential_Equations/Numerically_Solving_Ordinary_Differential_Equations_(Brorson)/07%3A_Symplectic_integrators 
